What is wireframing?

Short Answer:

Wireframing is a way to design a website service at the structural level. A wireframe is commonly used to lay out content and
functionality on a page which takes into account user needs and user journeys. Wireframes are used early in the development
process to establish the basic structure of a page before visual design and content is added.



Long Answer:

A wireframe is a layout of a web page that demonstrates what interface elements will exist on key pages. 
It is a critical part of the interaction design process.

The aim of a wireframe is to provide a visual understanding of a page early in a project to get stakeholder and project
team approval before the creative phase gets under way. Wireframes can also be used to create the global and secondary
navigation to ensure the terminology and structure used for the site meets user expectations.

A wireframe is much easier to adapt than a concept design

It is quicker and cheaper to review and amend the structure of the key pages in a wireframe format. Iterating the development 
of the wireframes to a final version will provide the client and the design team confidence that the page is catering 
to user needs whilst fulfilling the key business and project objectives.


Wireframing takes place early in the project lifecycle

Often used to complete the User Centred Design process, wireframes are also used at the beginning of the design phase.
A prototype usability test will often be a test of the wireframe pages to provide user feedback prior to the creative process.


Wireframes can be simply hand drawn, but are often put together using software like Microsoft’s Visio, to provide an on-screen
delivery. However, if the wireframes are going to be used for a prototype usability test, it is best to create them in HTML.
There is some good software that allows you to do this easily including Axure RP or Omnigraffle (Mac only).


Advantages of Wireframing

One of the great advantages of wireframing is that it provides an early visual that can be used to review with the client. Users
can also review it as an early feedback mechanism for prototype usability tests. Not only are wireframes easier to amend than
concept designs, once approved by the client and the users they provide confidence to the designer.


From a practical perspective, the wireframes ensure the page content and functionality are positioned correctly based on user and
business needs. And as the project moves forward they can be used as a good dialogue between members of the project team to agree
on the project vision and scope.

Disadvantages of Wireframing

As the wireframes do not include any design, or account for technical implications, it is not always easy for the client to grasp
the concept. The designer will also have to translate the wireframes into a design, so communication to support the wireframe is
often needed to explain why page elements are positioned as they are. Also, when content is added, it might initially be too much
to fit within the wireframe layout, so the designer and copywriter will need to work closely to make this fit.


Conclusion

Wireframes should be used early in a project to get user and client approval on the layout of key pages and the navigation. This
will provide the project team, specifically the designers, confidence in moving forward. Wireframes will also save considerable
time and money in the testing and amends phase later in the project.
